So let's talk about local variable type inference.
So local variable type inference, LVTI for short,
is also known as var declaration.
Now this is a Java 10 feature introduced
to reduce the verbosity of code in some situations.
This feature is only available for local variables
inside a method body.
So what we're going to do to demonstrate this,
let's see where we can use, LVTI,
I've created a new project LVTI, which I've got onscreen,
I'm gonna create a new class, and it's going to be
quite a long class name.
And I'm going to paste that name in there now.
And you can see that I've created a class
called a class with a very long name,
package com.wordycompanyname.alongpackage,
you'll see why we're doing that shortly.
So whereas I'm going to paste in some code,
very simple class as you can see there.
Basically a class with a single variable
and getter setter, to string method as well,
pretty straightforward.
Basically your plain-old java objective (mumbles).
Now we wanna play around with this
and instantiate it, so let's create a second class,
this one outside of the package, I won't have the package,
we'll call this one vartest.
And you can see I've got some code to instantiate
our class with a very long name,
and we're using a fully qualified class name there.
So we just run this to make sure it works.
Clearly, this is pretty messy and pretty hard to read,
pretty ugly code in other words.
All right now, we can make it somewhat better
by using an import statement, so let's do that.
Come back here, can add an import there,
and I must have my settings turned back on.
I updated IntelliJ, this is a trick actually
to keep in mind if this does happen sometimes,
that you find your auto input features won't get updated
when there's an update, like in my case it did
and that's why when I tried to copy and paste
the import segment it disappeared,
'cause it was trying to optimise things,
that's what I wanted.
All right, so we can make this a little bit less messy,
as I mentioned, by using an import statement.
So, you can basically remove the package
from the declaration and we can do that twice.
All right, so that's better with an import statement.
We've now removed the fully qualified class name
on both sides of the declaration
and initialization parts of that statement.
All right, so Java 10 introduced the LVTI,
local variable type inference, and that allows us
to change the way we write our codes.
What we can do instead is we can remove the type here
and just put var and put that all on the same line.
And that's now a lot more readable on line 11.
All right, so that's local variable type inference
but let's have a discussion on what specifically it is,
but also what it's not.
All right so firstly, local variable type inference
is a shortcut to reduce the verbosity of code
in some situations,
but what it isn't though, is a data type.
The data type must be able to be inferred by the compiler
when using it, and we'll talk about that
when we go back to the code shortly,
but also it's not a keyword, and that means
that you can actually use the text var as an identifier
and we'll see an example of that in the code later on.
So again, importantly, var is not a type,
it's just short hand designed to reduce
the verbosity of code when you're typing.
It can only be used inside methods for local variables
and the type of variable on the right-hand side
of the equation must be inferable by the compiler
to avoid compilation errors.
All right, so back with our code here.
So the reason that we can use var on line 11
is it can infer a class with a very long name,
it can infer that type because of the import statement
on line seven, and an equal,
if you used a fully qualified class name
on the initialization side of the statement on line 11,
that would also work.
All right, so let's now add some code to this class
and we're gonna examine some valid var declarations,
other than what we've seen so far.
So, let's paste that in.
All right, so starting with the first one on line 17,
var i = one, i is inferred to be an (mumbles) scenario
since it's assigned a literal int the value of one.
Line 20, an array can be assigned
to a local variable type inference variable,
in this case the code is quite valid on line 20.
Line 23, it's valid to assign a method return value
to a local variable type inference variable,
we've got that example again on line 23,
and also, line 26, it's okay to assign a null object
to a local variable type inference variable
but not the literal null.
So this is okay, we've got an object defined on line 26,
we're assigning that to a variable called var
and I mentioned that earlier in the video
that var is not a keyword and therefore we can
quite happily use that when defining a variable
and that's quite valid on line 27,
so what we can do, we can do it that way
because again, remembering the rule is
that the type of variable on the right-hand side
of the equation has to be inferable by the compiler,
so we're doing that on line 27
but we changed that to null,
that's now not valid because we can infer a type
based on the null, literal.
I'll take that back and we'll change it back
to null object again.
All right, so that's some valid uses
of local variable type inference.
I wanna paste in some invalid scenarios for you now.
So, firstly the examples on line 32 and 35,
you can't use a var declaration in a compound statement.
The first one there on line 32,
we can have a look and move our cursor up there,
it confirms that var's not allowed in a compound declaration
and on line 35, you can't use the var declaration again.
This is a slightly different scenario,
ultimately the same thing.
We've got var on the variable data initializer
which is also the error on line 38,
I just wanted to show you a different scenario there.
Then again, we have to initialise a var variable,
that's the error that we got on line 38,
which we incidentally also had up here.
All right, the other thing which I showed you earlier
is you can assign null to the var variable,
the type can be inferred in that scenario
and that's why we get an error there.
You can't use an array initializer
in a var declaration initialization,
we've got an example of that on line 44,
but also you can't have an array of var as well,
on line 47.
So, each of these statements, as you can see,
fails to compile, review them closely,
you may be asked questions about that in the exam
and what I'm gonna do now is
I'm just gonna remove those, just comment those out
so the code's there if you wanna download it.
All right, so moving on, let's create another class.
And we'll call this one var donts, okay.
I'm gonna paste in some code.
All right, so far so good.
But let's actually add a class variable
and an instance variable
using local variable type inference,
we're gonna add that obviously after the class declaration.
And you can see there that the static class variables
cannot be declared with var.
It's got no idea what we're talking about
and same for our class instance variable,
we can't be declared with var, it's only local variables
within methods that we can use this feature for.
Basically LVTI is not supported in these cases,
they can't be declared using var,
all right, so I'll comment those out.
All right, let's add a couple of methods to this class.
And again, you can see that we've got errors here.
The code fails to compile, method parameters
and method return types cannot use a
local variable type inference or var,
LVTI is only supported in local variable declarations
where the type can be inferred, as I've mentioned.
All right, so I'm going to comment those methods out.
Now the other thing to keep in mind
is that Java 11 introduced LVTI for lambda expressions.
Now we're gonna review that when we get to
lambda expressions later in this course.
All right, so let's end the video here
and in the next one, I wanna look at some
out of ordinary concepts for local variable type inference.
So, see you in the next video.